---
title: 'Device Minimalism'
date: 2025-02-21
permalink: /posts/2025/minimal/
tags:
  - devices
---
What if your phone helped you focus instead of distracting you?

## *Just* What You Need

[The Minimal Company](https://minimalcompany.com/) develops a [human-friendly](/posts/2024/daylight/) phone that addresses hardware design and software design problems. Without losing functionality, the Minimal phone controls distractions at the OS level.

The company doesn't downplay the need to access mainstream apps or features, but focuses on just what you need... and nothing more.
The device hardware includes e-ink display and a physical keyboard.

## Intentional Design

The Minimal Company sent the following statements regarding the design of their phone:

* "E-Ink Display – No bright colors, smooth animations, or high refresh rates that encourage endless scrolling. It naturally discourages excessive screen time."
* "Simplified Interface – No app icons begging for attention, no unnecessary widgets, and fewer visual stimuli."
* "Intentional App Use – While you can install any app, the experience is deliberately slower with the E-Ink display, making mindless scrolling less appealing."

## Thoughts

The human-centered approach to technology continues to intrigue me. The Minimal phone aims to cut out the mental stresses on users even before they reach any app interaction. The e-ink display is designed to be functional but "uninteresting," which reduces blue light exposure and overstimulation. The physical keyboard feels like a personal choice, but Ferris et al. (2015) conclude that tactile feedback can reduce mental workload. Anecdotally, I have heard that people with sensory needs do much better with physical phone keyboards.

With regards to EDAPPS, individual app design matters less when the mental effects are approached at the hardware and OS levels. A "Minimal" device may be the right medium for an educational device, focusing on intentional access to apps with reduced distractions. With a minimal device end-point, EDAPP designers may also be encouraged to create mindful, distraction-free educational tools?.

## References:

Ferris, J. D., Fitzpatrick, S. M., & Claypoole, V. L. (2015). The effect of tactile feedback on mental workload during the interaction with a smartphone. In S. Yamamoto (Ed.), Human interface and the management of information (pp. 190-200). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20907-4_18
